Adds a tutorial showing how to configure SPIRE to emit Telemetry. (#41)
spiffe/spire-tutorials: metrics/README.md

# Configure SPIRE Server and Agent to Emit Telemetry

> To demonstrate how to configure the SPIRE Server and the SPIRE Agent to emit telemetry we create a scenario using Docker Compose. We run a SPIRE deployment with two metric collectors, Statsd and Prometheus. Metrics collected by Statsd will be display using Graphite

Reviewer: Yes, the SPIRE telemetry doc should be updated to have the correct form of StatsD. Unfortunately, the string to use in the config file is "Statsd =" so it's tricky.

Yes, good catch on the second to last sentence. Shows and demonstrates both work here, but since demonstrate was used earlier in the paragraph, let's go with shows. Yes, use metrics with a plural.

> To demonstrate how to configure the SPIRE Server and the SPIRE Agent to emit telemetry we create a scenario using Docker Compose. We run a SPIRE deployment with two metric collectors, Statsd and Prometheus. Metrics collected by Statsd will be display using Graphite

Author: Great, I'll apply those changes. Thanks.

In this tutorial you will learn how to:
* Configure SPIRE Server and SPIRE Agent to emit telemetry
* Configure Statsd as a metrics collector
* Configure Prometheus as a metrics collector

# Prerequisites

Required files for this tutorial can be found in the `metrics` directory in https://github.com/spiffe/spire-tutorials. If you didn't already clone the repository please do so now.

Before proceeding, review the following system requirements:
- A 64-bit Linux or macOS environment
- [Docker](https://docs.docker.com/get-docker/) and [Docker Compose](https://docs.docker.com/compose/install/) installed (Docker Compose is included in macOS Docker Desktop)

# Part 1: Run Services

> The SPIRE server and Agent can be configured to emit telemetry by using a dedicated `telemetry { ... }` section on their configurations. At the moment of writing this tutorial SPIRE supports Prometheus, Statsd, DogStatsd, M3 and In-Memory as metric collectors. In this tutorial we'll show how to configure Prometheus and Statsd but configuration examples for the other collectors can be found on the [telemetry](https://github.com/spiffe/spire/blob/master/doc/telemetry_config.md) docs of the SPIRE project.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The SPIRE Server and Agent can be configured to emit telemetry by using a dedicated `telemetry { ... }` section on their configurations. At the moment of writing this tutorial SPIRE supports Prometheus, Statsd, DogStatsd, M3 and In-Memory as metric collectors. In this tutorial we'll show how to configure Prometheus and Statsd but configuration examples for the other collectors can be found on the [telemetry](https://github.com/spiffe/spire/blob/master/doc/telemetry_config.md) docs of the SPIRE project.
```

## Configure SPIRE to Emit Telemetry

> The `telemetry` section support the configuration of multiple collector and for some collectors is also possible to declare more than one instance.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `telemetry` section supports the configuration of multiple collectors and for some collectors is also possible to declare multiple instances.
```

> 

Reviewer: Please review. If ok, insert as a separate paragraph:

```suggestion
**Note:** The configuration changes needed to enable Prometheus and StatsD metrics collection from SPIRE are shown as snippets in this tutorial. However, all of these settings have already been made in the containers used in this tutorial. You don't have to edit any configuration files.
```

The following snippet belongs to the [SPIRE Server configuration](spire/server/server.conf) file. A similar configuration is also present at the [SPIRE Agent configuration](spire/agent/agent.conf) file.

```console
telemetry {
   Prometheus {
      host = "spire-server"
      port = 8088
   }

   Statsd = [
      {
         address = "graphite-statsd:8125"
      },
   ]
}
```

> The first collector configured is Prometheus. Its configuration accepts two properties, the Prometheus server host which defaults to `localhost` and the Prometheus server port. This values are used by SPIRE to expose an endpoint which will be used by Prometheus to pull the metrics.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The first collector configured is Prometheus. Its configuration accepts two properties, the Prometheus server host which defaults to `localhost` and the Prometheus server port. These values are used by SPIRE to expose an endpoint which will be used by Prometheus to pull the metrics.
```

For the purpose of this tutorial we configured the host property using the hostname of the SPIRE Server (and Agent) but it is important to note that this configuration allows SPIRE Server and Agent to listen for remote network connections what assumes a risk. When applying a configuration like this in a production environment, the access to the endpoint should be tightly controlled. 

Such scenario generates a warning message on the logs to alert the operator about this risk:

```console
level=warning msg="Agent is now configured to accept remote network connections for Prometheus stats collection. Please ensure access to this port is tightly controlled." subsystem_name=telemetry
```

> The second collector configured is Statsd. This is one of the collectors that supports the configuration of multiple instances. For that reason the configuration object expect a list of addresses. For this tutorial we define only one instance.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The second collector configured is Statsd. This is one of the collectors that supports the configuration of multiple instances. For that reason the configuration object expects a list of addresses. For this tutorial we define only one instance.
```

> The address configured matches the Statsd instance running on the environment. Will see the details about this instance in a following section but for now it worth noting that the address is formed by the hostname of the service and the default port for StatsD.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The address configured matches the Statsd instance running on the environment. We will see the details about this instance in a following section but for now it worth noting that the address is formed by the hostname of the service and the default port for StatsD.
```

By configuring the address, SPIRE will be pushing metrics to the Statsd collector.

##  Graphite & Statsd Configuration

> We use the official docker image for Graphite & Statsd. This image already contains all the services necessary to collect and display metrics. For this tutorial we map the port `80` that belongs to the nginx proxy that reverse proxies the Graphite dashboard and the port `8125` where Statsd listens by default.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We use the official Docker image for Graphite & Statsd. This image already contains all the services necessary to collect and display metrics. For this tutorial we map the port `80` that belongs to the nginx proxy that reverse proxies the Graphite dashboard and the port `8125` where Statsd listens by default.
```

> We use the official Docker image for Graphite & Statsd. This image already contains all the services necessary to collect and display metrics. For this tutorial we map the port `80` that belongs to the nginx proxy that reverse proxies the Graphite dashboard and the port `8125` where Statsd listens by default.

Reviewer: Ok, I see what you're saying. I still think it's helpful to specify both sides of the mapping even though they are the same. So maybe this rewording:

We use the official Docker image for Graphite and StatsD. This image already contains all the services necessary to collect and display metrics. For this tutorial we map the port `80` that belongs to the nginx proxy that reverse proxies the Graphite dashboard and the port `8125` where StatsD listens by default to the same external ports of 80 and 8125, respectively.

The `graphite-statsd` service definition is:

```console
  graphite-statsd:
    image: graphiteapp/graphite-statsd:1.1.7-6
    container_name: graphite
    hostname: graphite-statsd
    restart: always
    ports:
        - "80:80"
        - "8125:8125/udp"
```

The Statsd service will be available at `graphite-statsd:8125` as configured for SPIRE Server in the previous section.

## Prometheus Configuration

> Due to the pull nature of Prometheus we need to configure the HTTP endpoint where it will scrape the metrics. We've already configured SPIRE to expose the HTTP endpoint via the telemetry configuration so now we need to indicate to Prometheus that it should collect metrics from that endpoint. We achieve this by configuring the target with the hostname of the SPIRE server (or SPIRE Agent) and the correct port number (e.g. 8088 for the SPIRE Server and 8089 for the SPIRE Agent).

Reviewer 2: wondering if is it HTTP or HTTPS?

Author: It is HTTP: https://github.com/spiffe/spire/blob/a5b56f820d5d31de074e5e63ec90261b391dab19/pkg/common/telemetry/prometheus.go#L80

> Due to the pull nature of Prometheus we need to configure the HTTP endpoint where it will scrape the metrics. We've already configured SPIRE to expose the HTTP endpoint via the telemetry configuration so now we need to indicate to Prometheus that it should collect metrics from that endpoint. We achieve this by configuring the target with the hostname of the SPIRE server (or SPIRE Agent) and the correct port number (e.g. 8088 for the SPIRE Server and 8089 for the SPIRE Agent).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Due to the pull nature of Prometheus we need to configure the HTTP endpoint where it will scrape the metrics. We've already configured SPIRE to expose the HTTP endpoint via the telemetry configuration so now we need to indicate to Prometheus that it should collect metrics from that endpoint. We achieve this by configuring the `target` setting with the hostname of the SPIRE server (or SPIRE Agent) and the correct port number (e.g. 8088 for the SPIRE Server and 8089 for the SPIRE Agent).
```

Reviewer: Here, "with" is needed. However, it might be better to rephrase it using "to." -->

We achieve this by setting the `target` option to the hostname of the SPIRE server (or SPIRE Agent) and the correct port number (e.g. 8088 for the SPIRE Server and 8089 for the SPIRE Agent).

Author: I like that. I'll change it using the new suggestion. Thanks

By default the HTTP resource path to fetch metrics from targets is `/metrics` but SPIRE does not expose metrics on that path. Instead, it does on the `/` path. These configurations are part of the [prometheus.yml](prometheus/prometheus.yml) configuration file.

```console
scrape_configs:
  - job_name: 'spire-server'
    metrics_path: '/'
    static_configs:
    - targets: ['spire-server:8088']

  - job_name: 'spire-agent'
    metrics_path: '/'
    static_configs:
    - targets: ['spire-agent:8089']
```

> To run Prometheus we use the official docker image and we mount the local directory `prometheus` to make the [prometheus.yml](/prometheus/prometheus.yml) configuration file available at the container.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To run Prometheus we use the official Docker image and we mount the local directory `prometheus` to make the [prometheus.yml](/prometheus/prometheus.yml) configuration file available at the container.
```

```console
prometheus:
  image: prom/prometheus:v2.20.1
  container_name: prometheus
  hostname: prometheus
  restart: always
  volumes:
    - ./prometheus:/etc/prometheus
  ports:
    - "9090:9090"
```

## Run the Scenario

Use the `set-env.sh` script to run all the services that make up the scenario. The script starts the SPIRE Server, SPIRE Agent, Graphite-Statsd and Prometheus services.

Ensure that the current working directory is `.../spire-tutorials/metrics` and run:

```console
bash scripts/set-env.sh
```

Once the script is completed, in another terminal run the following command to review the logs from all the services:
```console
docker-compose logs -f -t
```

# Part 2: Test the Deployments

> Let's see some real data. Open the browser and navigate to `http://localhost/` to see the Graphite web UI and, on a different tab, navigate to `http://localhost:9090/` to access the Prometheus web UI.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's see some real data. Open your browser and navigate to `http://localhost/` to see the Graphite web UI and, on a different tab, navigate to `http://localhost:9090/` to access the Prometheus web UI.
```

To generate some data, let's create a workload registration entry using the following script:

```console
bash scripts/create-workload-registration-entry.sh
```

And with this other script we perform requests to fetch an SVID for that new workload. These requests will serve to generate some metrics.

```console
bash scripts/fetch_svid.sh
```

Wait a couple of minutes while metrics are collected and then you can create graphs to review them.

> There are different metrics exported by SPIRE that can be analyzed. A complete list of them can be found on [here](https://github.com/spiffe/spire/blob/master/doc/telemetry.md). As an example, the following images show a graph for the different values of the remaining TTL of the SVID fetched.

Reviewer: Max's PR to create that doc is still under review. We should probably remove this link for now and add it later when the PR is approved.

Please verify my change here.

```suggestion
There are different metrics exported by SPIRE that can be analyzed. A complete list of them can be found on [here](https://github.com/spiffe/spire/blob/master/doc/telemetry.md). As an example, the following images show a graph of the remaining TTL of each SVID fetched.
```

Reviewer: Yeah, that is what I meant to suggest. Sorry, I should have made that change in the diff. When we add it back, you can omit "on" from the sentence: "...can be found here".

Actually, it's a little casual to use "here: for a link, although you see it all the time. A more professional approach would be: 

The [Telemetry](https://github.com/spiffe/spire/blob/master/doc/telemetry.md) page has a complete list of metrics exported by SPIRE.

Author: Cool, I'm taking note of that sentence to use it once the other PR is merge. Thanks.
